---
layout: post
title:  "Data Science Perspectives w/ Dr. Paul Tang"
date:   2018-05-02 12:00:00
categories: data-science
comments: true
---

The April Flexner Discovery Lecture was given by Dr. Paul Tang, VP and Chief Transformation Officer of IBM Watson Health. His goal: to "put AI in its place", to "harness" it by ensuring *people* are in front, with computers in the background. The main points of his talk were the following:

1. The medical world has changed dramatically in the past 20 years, but not the tools and training.
2. Harnessing AI requires understanding the appropriate problem to solve (foraging, synthesizing evidence-based medicine). 
3. Retropective opportunities: Use AI to replace foraging time with human contact and professional judgment time. 
4. Prospective opportunities: Build "data stethoscopes" to complement and personalize RCT-based guidelines.
5. As we move forward, we must create a continuously learning health system at the point-of-care to make precision decisions.

### Retrospective opportunities

Current research suggests that physicians spend about half of their time working on EHR -- and at sub-optimal times. And data entry is often on weekend nights, which leads to physician burnout. 

But -- is that any better than it used to be? Before electronic records, up to 38% of physician's time was spent foraging for data in medical records offices. When I was prepping for medical school, I dealt with some of these records -- papers going in and out of portfolio folders, stacked haphazardly, scrunched into overflowing cabinets. At least now, you save the pain of moving those cabinets when the room becomes too small.

But the opportunity here is to hand the foraging over to AI. Computers could present the most salient data so that *humans* can make decisions. Bascally, if it's not useful, you shouldn't see it. NLP can pull out concepts (entity linking), get notes (relationship), then map to (EHR) to get understanding,, and generate a new story "synopsis". We knwo that there are "prototypical" questions that skilled physicians would ask -- so what if the machine could go and find that for you?

#### Prospective opportunities

Doctors make widely varied clinical decisions, often with less-than-optimal outcomes. There are a lot of biases - overconfidence, anchoring, confirmation. Evidence-based medicine is supposed to improve reliability in the health system, and the gold standard of evidence is the randomised control trial. But the issue with RCT is that it means you have a homogeneous population. In reality, people are extremely heterogeneous - even women and men are vastly different (e.g. in cardiovascular disease). But in current practice, we often smash results down to one guideline, even in large RCT. 

So, the question is, should we apply the results from homoegenous data in an RCT to all individual patients? Or, should we apply real-world observational data to treatment of every individual patient?  The answer to both is, no. We should empower the doctor to make their best judgment by providing them with models of expected outcomes from observational and RCT data. 

The fusion of these things could lead to the deleopment of "precision cohorts" for peronalized treatment. One of the major difficulties here is that, apart from the science, we have to improve doctor's educations in statistics and probability. The tools must reshape the education as they become available.


#### Other good quotes / points

* AI's place is at the intersection of technology and humanity.
* Dr. Tang promotes holistic medicine... The important thing is not for doctors to "work on someone's sugar". Large aspects of a person's life can be far more disastrous: loneliness kills more people than smoking.
- AI must be designed in policy, social, and technical contexts.
- Data scientists need to practice *ethnography* - looking for problems in the field (*in situ*) to properly discover the problems that need to be solved